I believe it's April the 10th, and this is tape
number three. Transcriber, when we transcribe
these, just continue where we ended off on tape
number two. Dr. Hubert, now try yours. Okay.
We're here in the cabin and ready to proceed. As
we go back to the early 1960s, One of the truly
revolutionary changes at A&M came as a result of
all of the work on what was then called the Century
Study. Do you have any recollection as to where
that idea for a major look forward and an internal
study, where that came from? Who proposed that?
Who thought it up? I don't know. who originated the
concept, the idea of a century study for Texas A&M.
I do know that although it was not inaugurated
until early 60s, that some thought was being given
to it in the late 50s in 1959 when I came aboard
Because as I indicated earlier, I think my
experience on the committee of 75 over at the
University of Texas gave me an edge up in being
selected for the position that I first occupied.
But who actually said, let's do it at A&M is unknown
to me. Do you remember anything other than
optimism about that uh effort no as it was
beginning it was enthusiastically received by
all constituents so far as i know haskell i don't
think of a i can't remember a single negative voice
concerning the the
the conduct of the century council study uh The
quality of the people selected for the century
Council. The fact that it was about half and half.
Farmer student non farmer student. The fact that
there were a number of outstanding women. On the
Council.
These things themselves brought a new tone to the
effort. and I think we're helpful in its getting
launched. The University of Texas had just a short
time before concluded its Committee of 75 study,
and that may have prompted A&M, I don't know, to
proceed accordingly as a mechanism for deciding
upon its future. But nonetheless, it was a
fantastic experience for all parties, I believe.
It was, I think, fast moving. It
addressed the questions that were relevant to the
university. What kind of university do we expect
to have on our centennial anniversary? What kind
of student body do we want to have? What kind of
programs and curricula? Where should our
strengths be? Questions of that magnitude, and it
was well done. Concurrent with the Century
Council study, was one done by the faculty
called the Aspiration Study. And it too, it in fact
was more specific in its content than was the
Century Council Study. The Century Council Study
was in some ways pretty highly generalized in its
recommendations. Whereas the aspiration study
was far more to the point and more specific. And I
think a blend of the two helped chart the course for
the university in the years to come.
How did faculty members like me get selected for
the aspirations committee? Who selected the
members, do you know? Did you deans make
recommendations? I think we did, Haskell, yes.
And I think the Koch building had some choices
also, but nominations also came from the deans of
the four colleges, schools. Was there any hint in
your recollection of any high-level
predetermination of membership or anything?
That is, the board or Mr. Rutter or somebody
saying, put this one, this one, this one? No, I
don't recall that. Some of that may have happened.
I never heard of any. I don't recall of it. I don't
recall it at all. those
committees met and their work I know that we call
the aspirations committee we had what we called
working parties to look at specific topics as
those committees were doing their work do you
remember much apprehension of anybody as to what
the final recommendations might be from the
aspirations committee yes sir
I can't pinpoint anything there may be there may
have been some anxiety again in the Koch building
I'm not sure but
I I don't remember that among the Dean's there was
any concern. Among the deans or their equivalent,
among the key administrators, do you recall
anyone who was more
conservative about any change at that time than
any of the others? Yes, yes. I think agriculture
was far more concerned about big changes. And and
was somewhat lethargic in embracing some of the
changes. Were you one of the more, using the word
liberal now as receptive to change, do you think
you were seen as one of the more liberal deans at
that point? I think so, Haskell.
In fact, a few years later, when...
The then College of Arts and Sciences was
reorganized into a College of Science and a
College of Liberal Arts. There was some concern
among
key administrators, the top ones, about the use of
the word liberal arts. Really, really. And in
fact, I was asked if I had considered a College of
Humanities as the title.
But the College of Liberal Arts title prevailed
and was finally accepted, although there, there
was some skepticism about the word liberal in the
liberal arts. I was asked at a retreat for
administrators that was held up near Teague,
Texas at some utilities company meeting house. I
was asked, why is it that you people in the liberal
arts are always the ones who raise cane around
here.
It was an interesting session. I introduced my
colleagues to the trivium
and the quadrivium from Greek and Roman times when
the liberal arts were first expressed in those
terms. And it was intended to be a serious
effort on the part of knowledge purveyors to
embrace those basic disciplines which were
non-vocational in nature and which in fact would
free, thus liberal, would free the individual
from having to participate in menial types of jobs
and effort, et cetera.
I was much better prepared on that occasion than I
am now to elaborate upon that early development of
the liberal arts through the trivium and the
quadrivium. But it was, I think, an eye-opener for
some of my colleagues. And I think they felt better
about it after that
effort on my part to explain the essence and nature
of the studies which comprise the liberal arts
sector. Now, the work of the Aspirations
Committee took more than a year. It and all of its
subunits that we call the working parties. Were
you and your colleagues in the administration
aware of some of the probable recommendations
before the aspirations report was finished? I
don't recall that we were, Haskell. Weren't
supposed to be. I don't recall that we were at all.
When the report was finished and the
recommendation for co-education, voluntary
core, racial integration and so forth, what were
the initial reactions of the people that you
recall? Mixed. There was still among the members
of the Century Council some true original
Aggies who did not support wholeheartedly the
move to coeducational and to a voluntary
military. they did not take it easily. And I'm
going to say among this number, there may have been
half a dozen out of the 100 who
constituted the members of the Century Council.
But
they did not indicate that they wanted to present a
minority report. And I think Harold Dunn's
leadership in that regard was another key element
in the success of the conclusion of the study. The
final report then, who were some of the strongest
supporters on campus that you recall to endorse
it? Oh, on campus? Yes,
sir. I think it was pretty universally accepted
and supported, Haskell. I can't point out any
single voices that were strongest in its support.
Those who might have been
slow to accept it, were quiet, as I recall. Mr.
Rutter, as far as you know, his initial reaction? I
think it was favorable, Haskell, yes. Now, I
understand from Wayne Hall that one of the
recommendations that bothered Mr. Rutter was
leaving the A&M out of the title. Yes, that would
have... been a great concern to him. He wanted the
A&M brand
locked in. Do you remember any attempt by any board
member to
contradict or counteract anything? No. No, I
don't recall at all. Now, as I look back on that
board, I say to a number of observers that Mr.
Rutter was fortunate in that he had a number of
people on the board then who had had major
management experience. Yes. And that that helped
them not to be nitpickers and micromanagers. Yes.
Let's see. Was the chairman of the board of
Tentaco, was he on board by that time? I think so.
And Sterling Evans. And Dow Chemical. Dow
Chemical, Boyle. Vice President. Boyle. Al
Davies, former CEO of Sears. Yes. Dick Goodson,
former CEO of Southwestern. Yes. Oh, yes. These
are great names, and they were strongly
supportive of the council study. All right. As the
aspirations, I mean, as those recommendations
began to take effect, share some experiences you
may recall as to the effects at the working level of
women enrolling and of black students being
admitted? It
was a period of,
at the working level, in the office, at the desk,
keeping the network alive. It was a rapid pace
environment. Things were happening so rapidly.
Enrollment picked up quickly. Space was a
problem.
Women were delightful. They added such a great new
chemistry to the campus, a great new
characteristic. Do you remember any anecdotes to
illustrate that? No. No, I don't. It was just so
fine to have them aboard. I think it helped with
the behavior of the student body general. In the
presence of a lady, one tends to be more careful
with one's behavior and language and so forth, and
I think in that regard it was a great additive to the
campus. That's not to say that before they came
there was not an
acceptable level of performance in that regard,
but they added that element.
I was concerned about getting new curricula
going. I was concerned, and this is without regard
to women and minorities. This was with respect to
the essential components of a college of liberal
arts. I was concerned about getting a philosophy
department going. That was my number one
ambition, a department of philosophy. I dearly
wanted to see it come about. I also wanted at
another level. I wanted to get geography out of
agriculture.
And that happened. How did you do that?
Simply mainly by. Indicating to the front office
that it needed to be done. And I had some at that time
Ed. Duran, a geographer, I think was supportive of
the idea. Smith, as I recall, who had been in
geography with Schleselmann many, many years,
was supportive of it, and he was an old liner in the
College of Agriculture. So that happened. Where
did you get the resources for philosophy?
Interesting, it came about in this way. At that
time, early 60s and far beyond earlier,
the several churches on the periphery of the
campus offered courses in the Bible. The courses
were built into the catalog They were placed in the
catalog in such a way that they were
non-denominational, thereby exempting their
offering from being criticized as
denominationalism.
And almost every, I think almost every sect around
the campus had its campus minister who taught a
course. And they taught the course in their
building, not on campus.
Now here's the trick they added to make it purely
denominational. In the battalion, each semester
before registration, they would run a little
block advertisement saying,
I don't know what the tag was for religion. Was it
religion itself? Or was it humanities? I don't
know. But we'll say it was religion. Religion 101,
the Old Testament. Section 21,
Father Donahoe. location in the Catholic Student
Union, well, you know, that's, and likewise for
each other, each other denomination or sector of
the churches around the campus. And under the
Coordinating Board formula system, that earned
some student credit hour dollars for Texas A&M.
Yes. Now then, I learned on one occasion, and I
picked this up through the registrar's office, I
think I got a tip from, I don't know that it was Lloyd
Heaton himself or someone in the registrar's
office, that in one of these classes in religion
being offered off campus, and I must say I honestly
do not recall which
which church it was associated with, there was a
prof, a campus minister teaching the course
who was very
liberal in student comings and goings. You really
didn't have to attend. And there were some
students who would register, I'm told, I was told
at the time, some students who would register for
the course and during an entire semester might
attend five times. Then at the end of the course
would receive a passing grade of A or B and get
credit for it.
I verified this information, then took it to
President Rutter I says, we're open for a lot of
serious embarrassment over this situation. And
we need to reclaim these courses in religion and
get them taught on campus by people whom we select,
whom we exercise some authority over. And We need
to do it quickly. He says, you think it's that bad? I
said, yes, sir, I certainly do. It would just take
one newspaper to pick it up from somewhere from the
battalion and what we're doing, and it would be so
embarrassing. He said, what shall we do? I says, we
need to create a department of philosophy.
And we did. He said, OK. Who are you going to get to
run it? I said, I'll employ someone. I'll go to the
key places and find. Among the searches that I made
for our first department head in philosophy, I
went to Yale.
There I met. I had corresponded with him earlier. I
met John Orr, O-R-R, brilliant young guy,
Presbyterian, incidentally, and he had just
finished his doctorate in philosophy, and he had
also had his, he had been in the Yale program of I
don't know whether they call it a divinity or a
seminary or what but He had been through that
Excellent program in religion and had his degree
there along with his doctorate in philosophy So I
thought that would make him more acceptable to the
campus ministers having that background
I Met with the ministers told them of our plans and
that we were going to bring the Department of
Philosophy on board and that when we did, we would
discontinue the off-campus offerings. They
accepted it okay. I think they were aware all the
time that
it was an
unsafe situation. John Orr came aboard, did a
great job as a one-man department. He was
department head and faculty the first year.
Students hearing about it and registering for the
courses just became thirsty for it, Haskell,
really excited about the language and
philosophy. And next year I think John employed
Manuel Davenport. I think Manuel came from One of
the California schools, I want to say, but he came
with excellent credentials. He was had received.
I think at his institution that which was called
the Albert Schweitzer. Award for teaching.
Made a great impression during the interview and
we brought him on board and excellent for the
department all the way through. So we got the
Department of Philosophy started in that
fashion.
Let's see. Then it was time to separate education
and psychology. We did not have on the campus at
that time any
practicing experimental psychologist
or a clinical psychologist. That was far, far out
of reach for us. But we needed an experimentalist
who could do some basic research and teaching in
the field of psychology and ultimately work
toward a degree in psychology.
Again, another interesting development. At that
time, Dr. Sidney O. Brown, professor in the
Department of Biology, had a contract with the
United States Air Force doing research on goats,
tracking physiological changes in goats after
they had been exposed to low doses of radiation out
at our nuclear science center, actually built a
goat shed out there, pens and goats.
He would expose the animals to low doses of
radiation, then would examine them and their
carcasses closely. The results were just from
well received by the Air Force. This is great
stuff. And they came back to Dr. Brown after a
couple of years of this research and they asked
him, Dr. Brown, will you add another dimension to
your research? And that is, we'd like to know what
behavioral changes take place. Brown says,
that's not my field, but I'll see about adding a
staff member to my research team who's an
experimental psychologist and see if we can't get
into that field. Brown came to me and said, told me
this story that had been asked of him. And he said,
I'd like to, he says, I think I can, I know a
connection over at the University of Texas. where
I can go over there and get them to let me have a
half-time psychologist to come over here,
appropriate intervals, and assist me in
research.
I said, have
you made any contacts there yet? No, I have not. I
said, let me make a suggestion. If your contract
will pay for half of a faculty person, I'll pay the
other half. Let's bring him here full time on that
basis and have him begin teaching some courses in
experimental psychology. Good. Brown was
receptive to the idea and we did that. At that time,
Dr. Walter Varvel, was the principal
psychologist I felt on campus, and he was in the
Department of Educational Psychology teaching
counseling courses and doing it admirably. His
degree, however, had been in experimental
psychology, as I recall, University of Kansas.
I asked him for his help. in finding an
experimentalist, a young person who could team up
with John Orr. No, not with John Orr, but with
Sidney Brown, and do this work. Of course, he did a
natural thing. He first contacted, I think, the
University of Kansas. They gave him glowing
remarks about a young doctorate named Casey. Ben
Casey or Albert Casey? Albert, one of the two. He
came aboard. And I often say that, well, not often,
but I sometimes say that
our psychology department grew out of a goat
research experiment. That's not too well
received, but I think it has some basis in fact. But
it's good for a land grant school that it grew out of
a goat herd. Yes.
Another interesting development at this time,
Haskell.
And this likewise has to do with program
expansion. And this is the story of the cyclotron.
I'm not sure of the first portion of this, but I have
a hunch
that one morning at breakfast, somewhere along
the line,
W.T. Doc Daugherty, senior fellow with the Welch
Foundation in Houston, and a devoted Aggie,
at breakfast with Earl Rudder said, Earl,
much of the cutting edge research in chemistry in
the years ahead is going to be done with a
cyclotron. We need one.
And with that beginning,
Incidentally, I think President Rudder had great
respect and regard for any recommendation that
W.T. Doherty made.
And so President Rudder began his quest for a
cyclotron.
Where do you go to learn something about a
cyclotron? Haskell, at that moment, we did not
have a single member of our faculty who had ever
performed any experiment whatsoever on a
cyclotron. None.
I think I'm kind in saying we were cyclotron
illiterate.
President Rutter said, I'll tell you what we'll
do. We'll take a team out to the University of
California at Berkeley and visit their cyclotron
Livermore Laboratories, see what's going on out
there, what a cyclotron looks like, what it does.
Let's get acquainted with a cyclotron.
And so I was asked to go out there along with Tom
Cherry, Fred Benson,
a couple of others. I don't recall who they were. We
visited for a couple of days on the Berkeley
campus. This was early 60s now, and the student
unrest out there was expressing itself every
hour. We walked through student groups every time
we crossed the campus.
I went out there, President Rutter asked me also,
Frank, I want you to see if you can find out what
they're doing in closed circuit television, what
they're teaching in television on their campus.
and see if you can get some clues as to how we might
get started in that game." Tom Cherry and I were
paired up to do that search.
We visited the cyclotron.
made prearrangements for someone to meet with Tom
Cherry and me and give us a guide through their
educational television system. It happened to be
Mel Chastain who was assigned to us. And we toured
the campus. They had only a closed circuit, but it
was an effective one.
When we got home, I
prepared my report to President Rutter that it was
feasible, gave him an estimate on what the cost
would be, and I underestimated it, I think. But
nonetheless, he said, fine, got started.
I told him about the Chastain chap. and that I'd
like to bring him to campus if I could. We brought
him to campus, offered him a job, and that's how we
got started in educational television. First as a
closed circuit system.
The cyclotron
was an interesting development. Fred Benson
initially was Let's see, what was the title given
to a person? Project coordinator. That member of
the faculty, that member of the university staff,
who represented the faculty's point of view about
the building.
Was it project coordinator? I've forgotten what
the title was. Nonetheless, Fred Benson started
out in that position, but after he got started and
met some people and brought some consultants to
the campus, and I met with all of them, mainly
because it was Fred's good recommendation that
the cyclotron should be more associated with the
Department of Physics. than it should be with the
Texas Engineering Experiment Station.
Fred learned from a consultant who was an employee
of the Livermore Radiation Laboratory that at
Berkeley, the laboratory people did not have
faculty status. And he said that was a great bone of
contention every day out there. He said, so when
you start out, give your people faculty status
somewhere. And he says, they're all physicists,
mainly. So physics is a natural location for them.
At any rate, I wound up as project coordinator for
the cyclotron, if you can imagine that. But the
deal was this. And I think this developed from Mr.
Dougherty. Mr. Dougherty said, Earl, The Welch
Foundation will give you $1 million.
You've got to try to see if you can get the Atomic
Energy Commission to give you a million. And the
university ought to put up a million. And for $3
million, you ought to get started in the cyclotron
business. That was an underestimate also. But
nonetheless, that's the way it started out.
The university was to build the building and
supply the staff. The Atomic Energy Commission
was to provide the cyclotron instrument itself,
that huge piece of equipment, and provide funding
for the research on a continuing basis.
This was early 63.
as I recall.
Yeah. And I've got a sneeze coming up if it
materializes.
Excuse me. We had
the consultants in
They did the initial development for a proposal
and a plan for the cyclotron, but said very
quickly, you must tell someone on your faculty
right now, preferably as a member of the
Department of Physics who has had cyclotron
experience, can write a proposal for a cyclotron.
and write the scientific proposals for research
to be supported. So you can take it to the Atomic
Energy Commission and get this funding.
The university employed a professor from, who had
had experience at Berkeley, by the name of George
Aigo, Aigo. Prior to that time, however, it was
necessary to go to the Atomic Energy Commission,
Tennessee, at their Oak Ridge location, and
negotiate the contract, the final details of the
contract. The three negotiators the university
sent up there were Clyde Freeman, distinguished
physicist, Donald Simon, At that time, my
assistant, outstanding scientist, and Frank
Hubert. And you know, I've never had a course in
physics. Chemistry, yes. Physics, no. But we went
to Oak Ridge, Tennessee, the Atomic Energy
Headquarters building there, sat down across the
table. Facing us were 13 scientists. members of
the AEC staff. There were scientists, there were
auditors, there were administrators,
the complete
ensemble.
Well, you know, I've forgotten the name of the
fellow who chaired that group. But he said, well,
how shall we get started, Dean Hubert? I said,
well, the first thing I'd like to know. It was
already agreed that we would do the building, and
they would provide the instrument.
I said, the first thing I'd like to know is, where
does the cyclotron start?
I knew it had to have lots of electrical power and it
had to be plugged in somewhere. I says, does the
cyclotron begin at the point where it is plugged
in?
I'd like a clear distinction in my mind between the
instrument and the building in terms of cost
allocation. Well, that opened it up easily for us
to follow that track in terms of where the
cyclotron begins and what it's going to cost and
what kind of building it will require and what type
of electrical power it will need. We spent a couple
of hours with them, turned out well, came back,
they approved Ultimately the contract George by
that time George Igoe had written a scientific
proposal for several research projects and It was
funded and off off and running
Such an experience but nonetheless At
that time this was this was 63 remember now Haskell
At that time, I'm
told one of the pressing problems on President
Kennedy's desk was, where shall the next
cyclotron be built? Hubert Humphrey badly
wanted...